Good morning.
Welcome to session 201,
How Threading Can Benefit
Your Application on Mac OS X.
My name is Mark Tozer-Vilchez.
I'm the Desktop Technology Manager in
Developer Relations.
So today what I'd like to do is start
the conversation with-- actually,
first of all,
I've gotten kind of feedback from the
fact that our session title is the
longest one at the conference this year.
So I've been asked to take
some input at the end of the
session for title suggestions.
So make sure you give me some input.
I need to shorten it here
is what I'm being told.
What I'd like to do is kind of
go over some of the ways that
Apple Computer has been working
to optimize system performance.
And some of the ways today
we'll talk about how you can
optimize system performance
through hardware and software.
So what I'd like to do is kind of take a
look at how we introduce systems at these
keynote shows like Macworld and so forth.
And aside from the features
of new functionality,
design, performance is one of the
key customer messages that
we deliver to our customers.
Customers want to be able to
say that if they're going to
buy this new piece of hardware,
their applications are going
to be able to run faster.
So performance is a key message here.
How does Apple address performance
aside from increasing the megahertz?
Well,
there are different ways we can do that.
We can use the processor technology,
the G4, that we've migrated
throughout our product line.
So the most recent addition has
been the Titanium PowerBook G4.
Other ways we've done that is
last year at Macworld New York,
we introduced dual processor systems.
So the ability to now have
two G4 processors with two G4
velocity engine available to you.
as well.
Other ways is the unified chip
architecture for I/O on the
bus has also been improved.
So information can be passed along
the bus much more efficiently.
So what are the ways that
you as a developer can take
advantage of these technologies?
Well,
there are APIs that we put out there.
So the MP API has been out for
at least three or four years.
Velocity Engine API has
also been out there.
So those are ways that you can optimize
your code to take advantage of some
of these hardware technologies.
Multitasking and multithreaded are
also ways that you can increase
performance just through the
application and not have to worry
about the processor being faster.
At the root of all of
this is obviously OS X.
And this is what you're going
to learn throughout the whole
week of how OS X provides all the
functionality and abilities for you
to optimize your code without having
to worry about when is Apple going
to deliver a gigahertz processor.
Well, today, what you should be really
asking yourself is,
when are you going to optimize for the
APIs that we have today and increase
performance on today's processors?
One of the areas also that I want
to kind of clarify are some of the
definitions that we use in this type
of presentation and conversation
about optimizing for hardware.
Multitasking is the ability to handle
several different tasks at the same time.
Multiprocessing is the ability of
the OS to actually utilize more
than one processor at the same time.
SMP, or Symmetrical Multiprocessing,
is the ability of the OS to actually
be a little bit intelligent of how
to schedule the actual functions and
execution of code across multiple
processors to actually balance the load,
so to speak.
Can we go to Demo 3 machine?
To give you an example
of what that looks like,
here's QuickTime running
three different movies.
And if you can notice,
the system is actually
utilizing both processors,
and they're pretty well balanced.
QuickTime itself is... Mr.
Schaffer,
would you go to Window or Aisle?
...is actually threaded.
So because of SMP,
the OS basically knows how to hand
off to each processor the task
of pushing pixels to the screen.
So if we had -- if
QuickTime itself was not threaded,
if it was a single threaded
application or technology,
you would see one processor being
overloaded and the second processor
kind of getting some time when
the operating system actually
divvied up some of the tasks.
Can we go to slides, please?
So what I'd like to do
is introduce Matt Watson,
Core OS engineer who will actually
deliver today's presentation
on why you should be threading
your application for Mac OS X.
Thanks, Mark.
So I work in the CoreOS group at Apple,
and we're responsible for most of
the lower level Darwin source code.
And I specifically work on the user
level implementation of Darwin.
So, why do you want to use
threads in your application?
What Mark alluded to earlier was
the user perception of the marketing
message we've been sending out for
Mac OS X is it's fully preemptive,
supports symmetric multiprocessing,
so customers are going to expect
that their applications are going
to run more efficiently and scale
better on multiprocessor machines.
So, to take advantage of that,
if your application can perform
tasks simultaneously and you're
running on a multiprocessor,
the customers are going to expect
that added benefit of performance.
Since Mac OS X is fully preemptive,
you'll notice that all the applications
are getting time-sliced simultaneously,
and if your application
has multiple threads,
it's going to get more than another
application's share of that time.
So, you're actually going to see the
benefit directly in your application.
In some applications,
you might notice that synchronous
requests would block the UI.
So we want to avoid that.
We want to make sure that if
you're coding and you're using
an API that could block for an
indeterminate amount of time,
an extra thread in your application
could help prevent the UI from blocking
and let that other request complete.
Also,
polling is considered bad on Mac OS X.
We don't want applications to
constantly check for state.
And one way you can do that is through
some of the synchronization mechanisms
that I'll discuss in a little bit
where you can have a thread that's
waiting for an event to occur in the
background and it will only continue
after that event has actually fired.
So, most cases,
your application may not need to be
multi-threaded in a lot of instances.
There are some times when the added
complexity of a thread may change
the logic of your application.
If it was written originally
to be single-threaded and
you have lots of global data,
your locking mechanism may not be as
robust as you have originally designed.
There's a little bit of added
overhead for an extra thread
to come into your application.
There's some kernel resources
that are associated with that.
And you basically need to decide
when you're designing your app which
portions of your application make
more sense to be multi-threaded.
There may also be other
options that make sense.
In a GUI application,
you always have a run loop
going that's polling for events.
And if you can use a timer
for a short-lived task,
that might be a better
option in certain cases.
Some of the overhead I was
talking about in a preemptive
multitasking operating system,
a context switch is what occurs when the
kernel decides to go between different
threads that are running on the system.
And there's data associated
with every thread.
Basically, the register state that each
thread takes up needs to be saved
and restored between threads.
There may also be extra register
state depending on if that
thread has used floating point
or even the velocity engine.
And that amount of data is obviously
a little bit more expensive when
you're switching extra threads
throughout your application.
The thread memory footprint is also
something that might be significant.
In Mac OS X, every thread gets a virtual
half a megabyte of stack space,
for instance, which is controllable when
you create the thread.
But you have to be aware of that.
So if you're creating a thread
that only calls one function,
you may want to reduce the stack space.
And I'll discuss APIs to do that.
I'll talk about that
here a little bit later.
Thread creation in and of itself is a
little bit of overhead that you need to
worry about because the act of creating a
thread introduces those kernel resources.
There's a set of Mach APIs that is used
under the covers to create threads.
And the calls that you use to create
the stack and the actual thread itself
take up a little bit of overhead.
Throughout the APIs that
Mac OS X provides for multithreading,
there are some common concepts.
All these APIs let you create a
thread and let the thread exit itself.
There are synchronization primitives
that let you coordinate the events that
are occurring between multiple threads.
And every API will have a
set of thread-safe services.
The documentation describes
things that you can and can't
do for multiple threads.
We're working toward making it a
lot easier so that you don't have to
worry about which APIs are thread-safe
by making sure that everything
that you call will be thread-safe,
but that's not quite there yet.
In Mac OS X,
threads are the scheduling primitive.
It's the unit that the kernel uses
when divvying up the work that needs
to be done at every time slice.
Our threads are fully preemptive,
so the kernel will interrupt a thread
that's running to start the next thread.
There are some exceptions to that where
we have some scheduling models where
a real-time-like API can be used to
specify somewhat of a deadline schedule,
where you can say,
I want my thread to run this long.
But in most cases,
the default threads that get
created are normally preempted.
We use a priority-based scheduling model.
So by default,
all threads get the same priority.
When you create threads or after
the thread has been created,
you can change or modify that priority.
So if you have a thread that needs to
be more important than other threads,
either in your application
or system-wide,
you can change that.
You can also depress the priority
of a thread if you want that thread
to be in the background more,
or if it's just doing some
low-level work that doesn't
need to be in the user's face.
We use a one-to-one threading model,
which means that as the
APIs I describe are calling into
the low-level kernel threads,
we use a single kernel thread
per high-level thread concept.
So as I discuss these APIs,
keep that in mind.
There are other implementations out
there where you have multiplexing of
threads in user space per kernel thread,
but the added complexity of that
and scalability on MP machines
makes it a little bit more
difficult to justify on OS X.
Mark Tozer-Vilchez, Matt Watson,
Robert Bowdidge,
Ivan Posva If you manage a thread's
priority through the Mach API and
not through the API you're using,
that API may not notice it.
So later on, your thread scheduling
might behave unexpectedly.
So this is a slide we've shown before,
and what it's trying to show is
an example of what happens if
you take an application and run
it on a multiprocessor system
with more than one thread.
And the numbers along the edge of the
bars there are the multiplier factors
for the improvement in performance.
So you can see the first, third,
and fourth numbers are all under two,
but that second number is above two,
which is kind of interesting.
And it's an exceptional case where
you might wonder how I could get
more than 2x performance improvement
on a multithreaded application.
Well,
if you have two processors in the system,
you also happen to have two caches.
So if your data set fit
in the primary cache,
you wouldn't see more than
2x performance improvement.
But what happened in this case
was the data set was able to
be split up across two caches,
and you actually got a little bit better
than a 2x performance improvement.
So you may be surprised.
In your application,
depending on the size of the
data that you're manipulating,
how good your performance
can actually be.
In the Mach implementation,
it was designed from the ground up
to be full symmetric multiprocessing.
So we don't have any special
case code for a single processor,
dual processor.
Everything on the system is designed
to be run on a multiprocessor machine.
The velocity context I mentioned
earlier is something that has to be
saved and restored across processors,
and that context that gets
saved is a little bit expensive.
That's what I was mentioning about the
overhead you might need to worry about.
On OS X, we use the same kernel binary
for either a single processor
or a multiprocessor system.
We don't have a special install
for a UP or an MP system.
This basically makes our own
development a little bit easier.
We don't have to QA two
different kernels on the system,
and it's a little bit easier for
us to do the install as far as
making sure that customers all have
the same bits on their machines.
The Mach scheduler was
inherited from the OSF,
the Open Software Foundation.
We use a scheduling
framework that they designed,
but we've modified it
heavily for our own use.
It has a global run queue,
meaning that all the tasks
on the system get switched
through on every contact switch.
The tasks that are runnable,
I should say.
The system notices that if you're
on a multiprocessor system,
you have an idle processor,
so it will go and schedule a thread to be
on the most idle processor at the time.
So we don't really have a
notion of thread affinity.
It might be a term you've heard of before
where you can have a thread running
on a single processor for a long time.
The kernel will basically balance the
resources of the system as best it can.
And as I've said before,
preemption is key here.
Every thread gets preempted as
it goes through the run queue.
The user frameworks that you'll see
when writing a multithreaded application
are probably just the same frameworks
you're using for your application.
There's nothing really special.
Most of the frameworks that we
have have an API for threading.
In Carbon, it's the MP or MPTask API that
has been out for a few years.
In Cocoa, there's NSThreads,
which are used both in the
non-GUI and GUI frameworks.
And in Java, we have JavaThreads,
which is just a special
implementation that is using the
underlying primitives in Darwin.
All of those three APIs depend on the
Darwin Pthreads or POSIXThreads APIs.
And since I work in the CoreOS group,
that's actually the API set
that I'm most familiar with,
and I'll talk about that later.
in a second.
Pthreads, as I said,
is the basis for all threading models.
Every API that I described goes
through the Pthreads layer.
So when we make changes and
enhancements to the Pthreads layer,
all of those API sets
take advantage of that.
I put in quotes there,
it's a light implementation.
The history behind that is when
we were trying to decide on an
API that we could use to implement
those higher level threading models,
we chose Pthreads and the
implementation decisions were
driven by those higher level APIs.
So if you look in the header
file in our documentation,
you might see that there are some
API calls missing and in general we're
working toward flushing out that API,
but the design goal was to help
ensure that the higher level Carbon,
Cocoa, and Java APIs could do their job.
We use a one-to-one Mach to
Pthread implementation,
as I said, that reduces the complexity of
our user level code and helps the
scaling on an MP system better.
In Pthreads, there are some common
API uses and misuses.
If you haven't done threading before,
Pthreads is a fairly
well-defined standard.
You can go to your local
bookstore and get a book on it.
I'll talk about some of the ways
that you'll need to be careful when
using Pthreads on our implementation.
For instance, one case,
we don't have any system-wide types.
So in Pthreads,
there's a specification that provides
global shared memory-based mutexes
and condition variables for signaling.
Those can be implemented
in your own application,
but we don't provide
those APIs right now.
One thing that you might need
to remember is synchronization
is not cheap in Pthreads.
The model that Pthreads uses
has a mutex lock associated
with a condition variable.
And for those to be properly
used in an atomic fashion,
we have to use some kernel resources
to do the signaling when you're
synchronizing between threads.
The default behavior for a Pthread
as specified by POSIX is that
threads are what's called joinable,
which means that when
you create a thread,
the operating system will hang around
and wait for that thread to finish.
If you want your thread to go
away and do its job and you don't
want to worry about it anymore,
there's an API to detach that thread,
which just means let it do its job,
I don't want to hear about it,
let it finish on its own.
As I mentioned earlier,
the stack space for a thread
is by default half a megabyte.
Now, it sounds like a lot,
but it's all virtual memory
that is used on demand.
So if you look at process listing,
you might see your application
using a lot of virtual memory,
but unless it's actually been touched,
the system hasn't allocated
that for your application yet.
So it won't cost you as
much as you might think.
But even given that,
if you have a lot of threads
running in your application,
you may want to create them
with an attribute saying,
I want my thread stack
size to be smaller.
And if you do that,
then you can limit the visible virtual
memory used by your application.
In the POSIX specification for
condition variables and signaling,
there's the notion of a predicate,
which is when you want to signal
that something has happened,
there's a mutex and a condition
variable associated with that,
but there's also some external
condition that needs to be checked for.
So you can have a global,
volatile variable that says,
"This thing happened." Well,
if you just use the condition and
mutexes without having a global variable,
the API won't work properly.
And this is discussed in a lot of
POSIX thread specification texts.
You can just look this up.
The most common error that
people use is they try and do
signaling without a predicate.
Our implementation of PthreadCancel,
which when you start using threads or
if you've used threads in other systems,
you might want to try to cancel or
kill a thread that's currently running.
And this is dangerous for a few reasons.
One is if you're using asynchronous
cancellation where you're
basically telling the system,
I don't care what the thread's doing,
I just want it to go away.
That's dangerous in the sense that
there could be kernel resources
associated with that thread that
may not be properly cleaned up.
There may be some other data associated
with that thread in some other task
that is not getting cleaned up,
like a file descriptor that's open or a
file that's taking up space on the disk.
So we recommend using the PthreadCancel
in its deferred or synchronous model
where you basically make a request to the
system that I'd like this thread to quit.
And in our API,
we have a PthreadTestCancel
call where if you're in a
long-running compute-bound loop,
you can check to see if, for example,
a thread has a request to cancel,
and if so, that thread will exit at
the PthreadTestCancel point.
The POSIX specification also provides
for system-defined cancellation
points like most system calls.
And if you look in the
Darwin source base,
you'll see that we're busily working on
implementing those because it's actually
a better way of doing the cancellation.
If I'm in an open or a read system
call and I tell that thread to cancel,
it should just break out of
that open or read system call.
if I had interrupted that system call.
The Pthreads documentation right now
is a little sparse on our system.
I usually point people to the
Open Group site because they
happen to have a pretty extensive
documentation on both the UNIX 98
standard and Pthreads specifically.
In general, we use that as our model for
doing our implementation.
We will be providing more Pthreads
documentation on the system
at some point in the future.
So in the Carbon APIs, as I said,
the MPTask spec is what you'd probably
look at for your multithreading needs.
MPTasks, just a quick overview.
In Mac OS X,
there's the notion of tasks and MPTasks.
So tasks have classically
been the process notion where
you have an application,
its address space, all of its threads.
In MPTasks, those are threads within
a Carbon application.
And as you know, in Mac OS X,
all applications are in
a separate address space.
So some of the APIs that you may
have used in classic Mac OS 9 are
not going to work the same way.
You can't do signaling
between applications right
now using the MPTask API.
The API here is pretty rich.
There are a lot of mechanisms to do
synchronization between MP tasks.
There's a semaphore model.
There are message
queues and event groups.
All three of these can
be used in different ways
depending on your application.
If you have some client server model,
if you have a worker thread model,
you can decide which
one works best for you.
The other API that's a little bit
unique here is the Critical Region API.
This basically lets you
do mutual exclusion,
and it also allows for recursive
entry to those regions.
There are atomic operations that are
present in this API that are kind of
handy for atomic increment and decrement
and test and set type instructions.
These are all done very efficiently,
and they're probably very close to the
same implementation as on Mac OS 9.
Some of the APIs that exist
on Mac OS X that use MP Tasks
under the covers are the
Synchronous File Manager APIs and
the Open Transport APIs.
If you'd like to see an example of
some of these APIs and the tech note
that we usually refer to is 1104,
the URL is kind of hard to read there.
But in general,
that will give you a background on what
we're doing with the MP Task APIs and
some examples of the thread-safe
services that you can use in Carbon.
The documentation specifically for the
multiprocessing services is on developer,
apple.com, techpubs, mpservices.
And all these documents are
being evolved to reflect what
the current Carbon API is.
The second framework
I'll talk about is Cocoa.
It's the high-level GUI framework
that Apple has presented as an
object-oriented environment for
doing application development.
NSThreads API is very simple to use.
There aren't very many
entry points to it.
Basically, you can create a thread.
You can get the thread's
state at any time.
The preemptive nature of
the thread isn't unique.
All the threads in the thread models
I've described are preemptive.
There's an exit notification
for NSThreads where,
even though the thread is detached,
meaning that it can go away
and you can forget about it,
you could also register
for a notification saying,
I'd like to know when this thread
goes away to clean up resources.
Common to most thread APIs is
the notion of a per-thread data.
And when you extend that into
an object-oriented environment,
the per-thread data becomes
a per-thread NSDictionary.
So you can have keys and values
that are associated with your thread
using the nice high-level Cocoa APIs.
In NSThread, there's an AppKit extension.
So even though NSThread is
defined in the foundation classes,
if you look in the
AppKit or Cocoa framework,
you'll notice that there's a method in
there that says detach drawing thread.
And what that lets you do is
give a hint to the system that
I'm going to be creating a
thread here that might be doing
interaction with the window manager.
And the AppKit will set up special state
to make sure that all its interactions
with the window manager are thread safe.
Now if you're writing a Quartz,
pure Quartz application,
that interaction is already thread safe.
In fact,
the way that you can write a Quartz
application without using any of the
Cocoa frameworks is to use one thread.
So you have one connection
to Quartz per thread.
And that provides all the
synchronization you need.
You still have to protect your global
data if you have multiple threads that
are running that are all trying to
communicate with the same connection.
You need to use the
synchronization mechanism that
I've described to make that work.
But in general,
the AppKit extension lets you
do all you need to do for a
Cocoa thread to let it know that
you're going to be doing drawing.
NSThreads are self-aware,
meaning there's no global notion.
You're not going to be doing
the distribution of all the
NSThreads on the system,
or you're not really going to
be handing NSThreads off to
other objects in the system.
All these APIs I've described,
since they're layered
on top of POSIX threads,
can ask for their POSIX thread.
And then once they've done that,
they can perform any of
the POSIX thread APIs,
like changing their priority
or finding out what the
stack size is for the thread.
But in general, NSThreads kind of stay
in their own realm.
They have a separate run loop.
So usually when you're
creating an NSThread,
since you're already in a
GUI application if you're using Cocoa,
there's a main run loop that's
associated with the first thread that's
been created on behalf of the system.
But new threads that get created are
going to have their own run loop,
because those threads will probably
have a different signaling mechanism
and different events that are
occurring that need to signal back
and forth between other threads.
So other Cocoa APIs that have to do with
run loops are timers and notifications.
And you can send those between threads
with a little bit of synchronization.
There's a concept of an
auto-release pool that,
if you haven't done any
Cocoa programming yet,
this is a wrapper for objects which get
created and destroyed kind of on the fly.
So you call a method,
it returns you an object,
and one notion that Cocoa tries to
help out with is the memory method.
So if you don't actually
explicitly create an object,
it just comes back from a call,
it gets what's called auto-released.
And the way the auto-release pool
works is on a per-thread basis.
So the main run loop has
an auto-release pool.
Every time through the event loop,
it releases all these objects
that may have been created on
behalf of another method call.
And in a separate thread,
you need to make sure that
you're maintaining the
auto-release pool as well,
because all the messages that get
sent on that separate thread will
need to be auto-released if they're
returning objects eventually.
The documentation for NSThread is also on
developer.apple.com in a very long URL.
Actually, the Cocoa documentation
is very well done.
And there's, I believe,
an O'Reilly book out
that you can go get now.
For future developments, basically,
if you follow Darwin,
since I'm involved in the CoreOS group,
we basically get,
we have the ability to put all
of our work that we're working on
daily in the public CVS repository.
So if you want to just go
to the Darwin webpages,
that will let you know how to go ahead
and check out any of the CVS repositories
for all the work that we're doing.
Specifically, the LibC project is where
the Pthreads code lives,
and the XNU project is where
the Mach kernel is and where
the Mach threading model lives.
Some of the things we're working on,
and we're also getting help, actually,
the Darwin community is very interested
in our threading implementation.
Priority inheritance is an issue
where if you have multiple threads and
you're finding your lock contention
becomes a problem where a higher
priority thread is blocked waiting
for a lower priority thread to run,
there are some solutions that
you can use in your application
to work around this problem.
In general, the system should help out by
temporarily raising the priority of
the thread that needs to run for the
higher priority thread to continue.
So that concept hasn't
been implemented yet,
but we're working on that.
The general API expansion issues of
the Pthread spec that we've provided,
we've gotten a lot of requests for
specific functionality that's missing.
We know about that,
and we're working on it.
The other thing that we've been
focusing on is performance.
Like I said in the first couple slides,
when you're deciding whether you
should use multiple threads in your
application or how you should use them,
we don't want to be an impediment there.
We don't want the choice to use
more than one thread in your
application to have to be made
because there's a performance issue.
In general,
you should use multiple threads
if your application has a data
model that works well with that.
If you have lots of data that can be
parallelized in its functionality where
you're splitting up chunks of data in
a graphical application that's doing
tiling or the best example we've used is
Photoshop a lot for some of its filters.
Those things lend themselves
very well to multithreading.
And we don't want you as a developer
to have to worry about whether you're
even on a multiprocessor system.
In fact,
if your application is written properly,
you should just automatically take
advantage of that second processor and
your customers will be happy because they
paid the money for the multiprocessor
box and they're actually getting the
performance that they would expect.
We're working on providing
more thread-safe services.
As I've mentioned,
in the Carbon APIs and even in
the lower level Darwin APIs,
we've been working pretty hard on
making sure that you can call the
APIs that you want without having
to worry about creating your own
locking mechanisms around the parts
of the API that are not thread-safe.
So right now we have a couple demos.
First I'd like to bring
up Robert Bowdidge,
who's going to show an example
of some of the developer
tools that we're working on.
Thanks, Matt.
So what Matt has done is explain
to us what the APIs are for using
threads and a little about the
reasons about why we might use them.
What I'd like to do is give us some
case studies and explain how some
of Apple's own tools use threading.
Now, the interesting problem--
So let's start this up.
Is that this is going to be
a somewhat unauthorized talk.
I've talked with the groups a bit.
But in general,
what we're going to do is we're going to
reverse engineer on the fly these apps
and try to understand what's going on.
The way I'm going to do it is with a
handy dandy little performance tool.
This is a pet project.
It's not yet on the developer CD.
That tries to visualize
how threading goes on.
Now, the first app I'm going
to look at is the Finder.
OK.
Let's get some action here.
and what we're seeing here is a
timeline view in Thread Viewer.
So each of the little blocks there
represents about a 50 millisecond
interval and each of the bars represents
Each thread.
And so the idea here is that
you can see that there's three
threads currently in the finder.
Click around.
and the colors change
according to what's going on.
So for example,
the green represents that there's
currently execution on that thread.
The yellow represents that execution
occurred but is not currently occurring.
So there was some execution
during the last sample.
The green, as in here,
represents that the program
was waiting in the run loop.
The red represents that the
thread was waiting on the lock.
Now the first thing I'll show you is
that you can see that there's basically
one thread that does most of the action.
That is the main thread.
And that's how most applications run.
So most of the drawing,
most of the UI logic is going on there.
The second thread from the bottom,
the one that's locked,
represents what the Finder
people call a sync thread.
So the idea is that they cache
a lot of the information about
what's going on in each folder.
However, when you enter a folder
that you've already seen,
you need something that will
go and make sure that nothing
is changed in that folder.
And that's what the sync thread does.
So the idea is it quickly
goes and it looks in that
directory in a separate thread.
Notice that it's always existing.
It's always locked,
so it can be started up quickly.
And by having it on a separate thread,
you not only have the ability to
basically have scalability and do
things in a multiprocessing way
so that you get quick response,
but also,
since you're accessing the disk,
you know that if that blocks-- because
let's say it's an iDisk-- you're
going to be able to go and access
that and wait for the response without
actually stopping the UI thread.
And so that improves the user experience,
as Matt was telling us.
Let's start Finder up again.
The other thing that you'll
find as we click around
is that each time that
we enter a new folder,
we can see that new threads get started.
So there was the remnants of one here,
and then we have a thread here.
And that thread only stays around for a
small instance and then goes away again.
And what's happening
there is that once again,
the finder guys don't
want the UI to block.
The finder would look miserable if every
time that you went into a new folder
and it went out to touch the disk,
if the entire finder locked up.
It's a horrible user experience.
And so to avoid that,
as many of you probably will
want to do in your own apps,
what they do is they have the disk
accesses going on in a separate thread.
When they enter the new folder, they go,
they catalog it,
they do that on a separate thread,
and that way they know that the
finder is not going to block
while they collect that data.
A third example is if we do a copy.
So let's go to the home directory,
and let's duplicate an application.
And what we find is, again, up here,
We've created a new thread.
The idea is that the copy is something
that's going to be a long-running
app or a long-running thread.
It's something that's going
to be touching the disk,
and so it's going to be blocking,
so you don't want it
on the normal thread.
And it's something that should be
running in the background because
it's probably something that the
user doesn't have a huge amount,
or doesn't really care that it
completes immediately and wants
to be able to do other activities.
And so the idea of being able to
split off this background task or
background process is an important idea.
So what you've seen here is that
the finder is using threading
to avoid blocking on I/O,
in case they're accessing
disks that are remote,
for example.
You've seen trying to improve the user
experience by making sure that blocking
stuff happens on separate threads,
and you've seen the idea of using
the threads for background actions.
Okay, the second example I'd
like to show is iTunes.
So let's go back to Thread Viewer.
Amen.
We'll see there's a few
more threads in this.
So let's start out by
getting some music playing.
Okay, so we know it's actually playing.
You know that this isn't canned.
And what you see here is the
activity going on in the threads.
The thread at the bottom, again,
is the main thread.
So it's sitting there and
it's doing all the UI work.
And if we actually had the
visualization part of iTunes going,
you'd see that thread
basically pegging out,
constantly running.
The next thread up represents
basically data collect,
or is the data decompression,
which is actually running as a
deferred task as a Carbon thread.
What you also will see is
occasionally on this third thread,
there'll be some green blocks that go by.
And what's happening there is that
there's actually a separate thread
that's being used for accessing the disk.
And so the idea is that
this thread goes off,
and every now and then
when it needs data,
it grabs as much data as it can,
stores it in a buffer.
Then there's a separate thread that
actually does the decompression.
And then the thread at the very
top where you see all the activity
is actually the thread that sends
data off to the audio device.
On the disk,
we want to do large accesses.
We want to grab a huge amount of
data and then do the decompression.
With the audio device,
we want to minimize latency.
And so the idea is we want to
throw a few little bytes at a
time out to that audio device.
And so by having that
on a separate thread,
that means that we can easily
send the data that's needed and
do it in as timely a manner as
possible so we have no dropouts.
In actuality,
the three threads that you see there,
the decompression, the disk reads,
and the audio playback,
are actually all controlled
by the sound system.
And so the sound manager.
So they're actually not threads
that iTunes actually went to
any trouble to actually create.
But once again,
you're seeing cases of iTunes using
threading to avoid blocking on disk I/O.
You see it trying to take the
tasks that are time critical and
put them on separate threads.
And you're seeing the idea of
trying to make sure that you can
parallelize the code by breaking the
major parts of sort of this pipe and
filter model into separate threads.
Okay, these were just two examples about
how Apple is actually using threading.
Hopefully the people who are
available for Q&A can give you
some more ideas about when to
use threading and when not to.
Thank you.
Thanks, Robert.
So the second demo we have is Ivan Posva,
who works on the Java Virtual Machine.
And as I said earlier,
there are definitely cases
where your application is more
inclined to be multithreaded,
especially if you have lots of data
that can be operated on in parallel.
So he's going to give us an example
of an application where this is
the case and helps out a lot.
Okay, good morning.
What I have is basically a digital
elevation model from Switzerland,
and I wrote a swing app that basically
renders scenes within Switzerland.
So I have a UI element down here, swing.
It says one, so I'll spawn this
rendering in one thread.
So it goes off,
it tiles the image into small pieces,
and does that on a thread.
You see in the task manager,
one CPU is usually used,
and the other CPU is Java UI making use
of the spare processing power to display.
So we saw that it took 15.7
seconds to display this image.
If I go to two or even three
threads on this machine,
when I restart this image,
we see that it's not going
to display the image.
So we can see that the
UI updates much quicker.
It's pegging both the CPUs, calculating.
So what else do I have?
I can do the same thing
with the satellite image,
just taking the...
Mark Tozer-Vilchez, Matt Watson,
Robert Bowdidge, Ivan Posva
still use the UI while
it's calculating the stuff.
So Java itself has built in support
for threading in the language.
It's rather easy to use threading,
rather easy for us to update the UI at
the same time as you do calculation.
That's about it.
So what was the performance benefit you
saw with your multi-threaded example?
For this calculation,
it was about 1.8 scale factor,
so that's pretty good.
If you consider that part of the update
is happening while you're calculating,
it's pretty using the
processors at max speed.
So it's also a feature of the swing
implementation that the developer
doesn't have to worry about the
locking for drawing to the UI,
that just happens for them?
That happens behind the
scenes for the user.
You just say, repaint this area.
Here's your new image.
That's it.
Great.
Thanks, Ivan.
So I'll bring up Mark to finish
off the information about this
session and other sessions.
What I wanted to do is bring up related
sessions that you might be interested
in furthering your knowledge about
tuning and specific areas of how
to get hardware advancements here.
So session 121 with
Carbon Performance Tuning,
which Robert will be at,
advanced Cocoa topics for session 123,
the Darwin Kernel, and session 140.
I also want to add that there will be
a Birds of a Feathers session at the
end of the evening today at 6 p.m.
here in Hall C, I believe it is,
with Velocity Engine.
So we will actually discuss with
the updates on Velocity Engine.
We wanted to kind of separate both
of these topics and allocate as
much time as we could to threading.
One of the things that last
year I was up here on stage
promoting to you developers,
and at that time we didn't
have dual-processor.
I was promoting the fact that you
should thread your application,
kind of not being able to tell you that,
hey, we're coming out with
multi-processor systems.
But if you thread today,
as OS X matures and was
actually going to be released,
your application will run faster
simply because the threading
model within OS X is a lot more
efficient than what is in OS 9.
So today with multi-processor systems,
you can see now why there's even
more of a reason why you want
to optimize your applications.
So taking that into account.
So if you're doing a
single-threaded application,
bringing it over to Mac OS X,
the customer experience is going to be,
well, there might be some
performance enhancement,
but really it's more perceptual
because OS X is actually
doing all the work for you.
If you multi-thread your application,
you get additional benefits
because OS X now says,
okay, great, I can move things around a
lot quicker and use the thread
model within the Mach kernel.
Now, the next step is really
optimizing your application.
So what we're doing is optimizing for
MP because just providing threads is
not going to give you the efficiency
of using that second processor.
That's where SMP comes into play.
So actually paralyzing your code
and seeing where it makes sense to
actually have your thread go off to
the second processor is what factoring
or paralyzing your code involves.
And that's what we term as
optimization for MP hardware.
And that's what you kind of saw in
the example with QuickTime itself,
actually balancing the pegging of each
processor so that SMP itself can...
take care of the housekeeping there.